ENGLISH

COLLOCATIONS
How words work
together for fluent
and natural English
Self-study and
classroom use

IN USE

Second Edition

Intermediate
Michael McCarthy
Felicity O’Dell

English

collocations
How words work
together for fluent
and natural English
Self-study and
classroom use

in Use

Second Edition

Intermediate
Michael McCarthy
Felicity O’Dell

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
4843/24, 2nd Floor, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, Delhi – 110002, India
79 Anson Road, #06–04/06, Singapore 079906
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781316629758
© Cambridge University Press 2017
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2005
Second edition 2017
20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in Dubai by Oriental Press
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-31-66297-58 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel timetables, and other
factual information given in this work is correct at the time of first printing but
Cambridge University Press does not guarantee the accuracy of such information
thereafter.

Contents
Acknowledgements		
3
Using this book				
4
Learning about collocations

1
2
3
4
5

What is a collocation?
Finding, recording and learning collocations
Using your dictionary
Types of collocation
Register

Grammatical aspects of collocations

6
7
8
9

Intensifying adverbs

highly unlikely, utterly ridiculous, strongly object

Everyday verbs 1

make a mistake, do your best, do damage

Everyday verbs 2

go bald, become extinct, fall ill

Everyday verbs 3

have fun, take action, pay a compliment

Special aspects of collocation

10 	Synonyms and confusable words 1
11 	Synonyms and confusable words 2
12 Metaphor

close a meeting, antique furniture, only child
gain power, achieve your goals, defeat an opponent
sunny smile, ideas flow, heated discussion

Topics: Travel and the environment

13
14
15
16

Weather

strong wind, blanket of fog, river bursts its banks

Travel

tiring journey, aisle seat, family-run hotel

Countryside

surrounding countryside, well worth seeing

Towns and cities

lined with shops, sprawling city, volume of traffic

Topics: People and relationships

17 People: character and behaviour
18 People: physical appearance
19 Families
20 Relationships
Topics: Leisure and lifestyle

have a vivid imagination, lose your patience

21 Houses, flats and rooms
22 Eating and drinking
23 Films and books
24 Music
25 	Sport
26 Health and illness

move into a flat, spacious living room

slender waist, immaculately groomed
distant cousin, expecting a baby, stable home
casual acquaintance, love at first sight

nourishing meal, spoil your appetite, dying of hunger
film critic, go on the stage
give a performance, go on tour, strum a guitar
go snowboarding, take a penalty
catch a cold, vigorous exercise, be taken ill
English Collocations in Use Intermediate

1

Topics: Work and study

2

27 Using the Internet
28 	Study and learning
29 Presentations
30 Work
31 	Business
32 Academic writing 1
33 Academic writing 2
Topics: Society and institutions
34 Laws and punishments
35 Crime
36 News
37 Money
38 War and peace
39 Global problem
Basic concepts
40 Time
41 	Sound
42 Distance and size
43 Colour and light
44 Texture
45 Taste and smell
46 Number and frequency
47 Movement and speed
48 Change
49 Ways of speaking
50 Ways of walking
Functions

refine your search, open an attachment

51 	Starting and finishing
52 Talking about success and failure
53 Talking about cause and effect
54 Remembering and sensing
55 Agreeing and disagreeing
56 Talking about beliefs and opinions
57 Deciding and choosing
58 Claiming and denying
59 Liking and disliking
60 Praising and criticising
Key
Index

promising start, bring something to an end

English Collocations in Use Intermediate

do research, attend a lecture, first draft
target audience, prepare handouts, public speaking
high-powered job, hand in your notice
set up a business, launch a product, rival company
key factor, challenge a theory, carry out research
make reference to, argue convincingly, research suggests
break the law, bend the rules, fair trial
hardened criminal, juvenile crime, tackle crime
hit the headlines, hold talks, take hostage
squander money, price soars, go cheap
war breaks out, restore order, call a truce
eradicate poverty, forced and voluntary migration
save time, ungodly hours, from dawn till dusk
break the silence, excessive noise, almighty bang
within commuting distance, painfully thin
bright colour, beam of light, shed some light on
choppy sea, soft pillow, ice melts
fragrant perfume, have a taste, smell danger
significant number, come to a total of, rare species
prompt payment, painfully slow, lose your balance
make an adjustment, break a habit, change the subject
brief chat, raise a subject, drop a hint
pace up and down, wander aimlessly, faltering steps

make a breakthrough, fail miserably
cause alarm, adverse effects, have a major impact
vaguely remember, blot out a memory, have a feeling
settle a dispute, agree to differ, heated argument
firmly believe, colour someone’s judgement
arrive at a decision, have second thoughts, tough choice
make the point that, contradictory evidence
have a liking, state a preference, take offence
offer your congratulations, speak highly of

126
158

Acknowledgements
Joy Goodwin wrote two new units for the Second Edition: Unit 27, Using the Internet, and Unit 29,
Presentations. The publishers would like to thank Joy for her contribution to this edition.
The authors and publishers acknowledge the following sources of copyright material and
are grateful for the permissions granted. While every effort has been made, it has not always
been possible to identify the sources of all the material used, or to trace all copyright holders.
If any omissions are brought to our notice, we will be happy to include the appropriate
acknowledgements on reprinting & in the next update to the digital edition, as applicable.

Key: T = Top, B = Below, TR = Top Right, CR = Centre Right, CL = Centre Left, BL = Below Left.
Photographs
All the photographs are sourced from Getty Images.
p. 7: uanmonino/iStock/Getty Images Plus; p. 17: FatCamera/E+; p. 19 & p. 78: PeopleImages/E+;
p. 21: Inti St Clair/Blend Images; p. 25: Muhammad Owais Khan/Moment; p. 25 (photo 1): Echo/
Cultura; p. 25 (photo 2): Dougal Waters/DigitalVision; p. 25 (photo 3): onurdongel/iStock; p. 25
(photo 4): Tuomas Marttila/Maskot/Getty Images Plus; p. 25 (photo 5): Cultura RM Exclusive/
Henry Arden/Cultura Exclusive; p. 25 (photo 6): Tom Merton/OJO Images; p. 27: swissmediavision/
iStock/Getty Images Plus; p. 30: John Linton/EyeEm; p. 32 & p. 70 (photo 3): Hero Images; p. 36
(photo 1): Ezra Bailey/Photonica; p. 36 (photo 2) & p. 116 (photo 4): Jose Luis Pelaez Inc/Blend
Images; p. 36 (photo 3): Kathrin Ziegler/Taxi; p. 36 (photo 4): Dan Kitwood News; p. 37 (photo 1):
Blackstation; p. 37 (photo 2): Danja Ulrich/EyeEm; p. 37 (photo 3): jayk7/Moment; p. 37 (photo
4): Stephen Dorey/Photodisc; p. 38: monsitj/iStock/Getty Images Plus; p. 43 (photo 1): Hill Street
Studios/Blend Images; p. 43 (photo 2): Philipp Nemenz/Cultura; p. 45: Jake Curtis/Iconica; p. 47:
Stephen Dorey/Photolibrary; p. 48 (CL) & p. 58 (T): Klaus Vedfelt/DigitalVision; p. 48 (CR): Casarsa/
E+; p. 52: Robert Kohlhuber/Stockbyte; p. 55: Martin Poole/DigitalVision; p. 56: Mike Harrington/
DigitalVision; p. 58 (B): Daniel Sambraus/EyeEm; p. 60: Maskot; p. 61: Caiaimage/Sam Edwards/
OJO+; p. 62: ImagesBazaar; p. 64: filadendron/E+; p. 65 (TR): John Lamb/DigitalVision; p. 65 (photo
1): Portra Images/DigitalVision; p. 65 (photo 2): Yuri_Arcurs/DigitalVision; p. 65 (photo 3): Klaus
Tiedge/Blend Images; p. 70 (photo 1): Bloomberg; p. 70 (photo 2): JohnnyGreig/E+; p. 70 (photo 4):
IPGGutenbergUKLtd/iStock; p. 73: RichLegg/E+; p. 80: George Marks/Retrofile; p. 81: Cebas/iStock;
p. 85 (man): Marli/STOCK4B-RF; p. 85 (e-chess): klenger/iStock; p. 85 (phone): Apple Bookazine/
Future; p. 85 (tracker): MileA/iStock; p. 90: Image by Catherine MacBride/Moment; p. 99: Phillip
Suddick/Taxi; p. 102 (TR): Creatas; p. 102 (BL): Jetta Productions/Blend Images; p. 111: lambada/
Vetta; p. 112: Image Source; p. 113 (photo 1): Kajetan Kandler/Stone; p. 113 (photo 2), p. 116
(photo 6) & p. 118: Morsa Images/DigitalVision; p. 113 (photo 3): Michael Blann/Iconica; p. 113
(photo 4): Howard Kingsnorth/Iconica; p. 116 (photo 1): Nick Daly/Iconica; p. 116 (photo 2): David
A Land/Blend Images; p. 116 (photo 3): Westend61; p. 116 (photo 5): Indeed; p. 116 (photo 7):
photosindia; p. 116 (photo 8): Ezra Bailey/Taxi; p. 120: DreamPictures/Stone; p. 123: Guido Cavallini/
Cultura; p. 125 (photo 1): Caiaimage/Tom Merton/Riser; p. 125 (photo 2): blue jean images/China;
p. 125 (photo 3): annabaek/iStock/Getty Images Plus; p. 125 (photo 4): 4x6/iStock/Getty
Images Plus.
Illustrations
John Lund (Beehive Illustration), Katie Mac (NB Illustration), Martina (KJA Artists) and Miguel Diaz
Rivas (Advocate Art).

English Collocations in Use Intermediate

3

Using this book
What is a collocation?
Collocation means a natural combination of words; it refers to the way English words are closely
associated with each other. For example, do and homework go together, as do make and mistakes; tall
goes with man/woman and high with mountain.

Why learn collocations?
You need to learn collocations because they will help you to speak and write English in a more natural
and accurate way. People will probably understand what you mean if you talk about ‘making your
homework’ or say ‘My uncle is a very high man’ but your language will sound unnatural and might
perhaps confuse. Did you mean that your uncle is two metres tall or did you mean that he has a high
position in government or business?
Learning collocations will also help you to increase your range of English vocabulary. For example,
you’ll find it easier to avoid words like very or nice or beautiful or get by choosing a word that fits the
context better and has a more precise meaning. This is particularly useful if you are taking a written
exam in English and want to make a good impression on the examiners.

How were the collocations in the book selected?
The collocations presented in this book were mainly selected from those identified as significant by
the Cambridge International Corpus of written and spoken English (now known as the Cambridge
English Corpus) and also the CANCODE corpus of spoken English, developed at the University of
Nottingham in association with Cambridge University Press. The Cambridge English Corpus is a vast
database of real English taken from a range of sources, such as books, newspapers, advertising,
letters and emails, websites, conversations and speeches, radio and television. By studying this corpus
we obtained a representative picture of how English is really used and which words naturally and
frequently go together. We also made much use of the Cambridge Learner Corpus, a corpus of learner
English made up of exam scripts from students taking Cambridge English examinations all over the
world. This particular corpus showed us what kind of collocation errors learners tend to make.
These corpora show that there are many thousands of collocations in English. So how could we select
which ones would be most useful for you to work on in this book?
Firstly, of course, we wanted to choose ones that you might want to use in your own written and
spoken English. So, in the unit on Eating and drinking we include, for example, have a quick snack and
processed food but not cocoa butter, which is a very strong collocation, but one which has very limited
use for most people.
Secondly, we decided it would be most useful for you if we focused on those collocations which are
not immediately obvious and which the Cambridge Learner Corpus shows can cause problems for
students. A friendly girl, cold water or to eat an apple are all collocations, but they are combinations
which you can easily understand and produce yourself without any problems. So we deal here with
less obvious – though equally useful – word combinations, with, for instance, make friends (not get
friends) and heavy rain (not strong rain).
Idioms are a special type of collocation where a fixed group of words has a meaning that cannot be
guessed by knowing the meaning of the individual words. We deal with them separately in English
Idioms in Use and so do not focus on them here.

4

English Collocations in Use Intermediate

How is the book organised?
The book has 60 two-page units. The left-hand page presents the collocations that are focused on in
the unit. You will usually find examples of collocations in typical contexts with, where appropriate,
any special notes about their meaning and their usage. The right-hand page checks that you have
understood the information on the left-hand page by giving you a series of exercises that practise the
material just presented.
The units are organised into different sections. First we start with important information about
collocations in general. Then there are sections looking at grammatical and other special aspects
of collocations. The rest of the book deals with collocations that relate to particular topics such as
Weather or Business, concepts such as Time or Change and functions such as Agreeing and disagreeing
or Liking and disliking.
The book has a key to all the exercises and an index which lists all the collocations we deal with and
indicates the units where they can be found.

How should I use this book?
We recommend that you work through the five introductory units first so that you become familiar
with the nature of collocations and with how best to study them. After that, you may work on the units
in any order that suits you.

What else do I need in order to work with this book?
You need a notebook or file in which you can write down the collocations that you study in this book
as well as any others that you come across elsewhere.
You also need to have access to a good dictionary. We strongly recommend the Cambridge Learner’s
Dictionary or the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, as both of these give exactly the kind
of information that you need to have about collocations. They do this both through the examples
provided for each word entry and through their special collocations boxes or mini-panels.
For more information about Cambridge dictionaries and to do online searches you could go to
http://dictionary.cambridge.org. Your teacher, however, may also be able to recommend other
dictionaries that you will find useful.
So, a study of collocation is highly recommended (Unit 6) if you want to make a good impression
(Unit 2) with your natural and accurate use of English. Above all, we hope that you will not only learn a
lot but will also have fun (Unit 9) as you do the exercises (Unit 7) in this book.

English Collocations in Use Intermediate

5

1

What is a collocation?
A

A collocation is a pair or group of words that are often
used together. These combinations sound natural to
native speakers, but students of English have to make
a special effort to learn them because they are often
difficult to guess. Some combinations just sound ‘wrong’
to native speakers of English. For example, the adjective
fast collocates with cars, but not with a glance.

We say …

We don’t say …

fast cars
fast food

quick cars
quick food

a quick glance
a quick meal

a fast glance
a fast meal

Learning collocations is an important part of learning
the vocabulary of a language. Some collocations are fixed, or very strong, for example take a photo,
where no word other than take collocates with photo to give the same meaning. Some collocations
are more open, where several different words may be used to give a similar meaning, for example
keep to / stick to the rules. Here are some more examples of collocations.
You must make an effort and study for your exams (NOT do an effort)
Did you watch TV last night? (NOT look at TV)
This car has a very powerful engine. It can do 200 km an hour. (NOT strong engine)
There are some ancient monuments nearby. (NOT antique monuments)
Sometimes, a pair of words may not be absolutely wrong, and people will understand what is meant,
but it may not be the natural, normal collocation. If someone says I did a few mistakes, they will be
understood, but a fluent speaker of English would probably say I made a few mistakes.

B

Compounds and idioms

Compounds are units of meaning formed with two or more words. Sometimes the words are written
separately, sometimes they have a hyphen and sometimes they are written as one word. Usually the
meaning of the compound can be guessed by knowing the meaning of the individual words. Some
examples of compounds are car park, post office, narrow-minded, shoelaces, teapot.
It is not always easy to separate collocations and compounds and, where they are useful for learners
or an important part of the vocabulary of a topic, we include some compounds in this book too.
Idioms are groups of words in a fixed order that have a meaning that cannot be guessed by knowing
the meaning of the individual words. For example, pass the buck is an idiom meaning ‘to pass
responsibility for a problem to another person to avoid dealing with it oneself’. We deal with idioms
in detail in the book English Idioms in Use in this series.

C

Why learn collocations?

Learning collocations is a good idea because they can:
a) give you the most natural way to say something: smoking is strictly forbidden is more natural
than smoking is strongly forbidden.
b) give you alternative ways of saying something, which may be more colourful/expressive or more
precise: instead of repeating It was very cold and very dark, we can say It was bitterly cold and pitch
dark.
c) improve your style in writing: instead of saying poverty causes crime, you can say poverty breeds
crime; instead of saying a big meal you can say a substantial meal. You may not need or want to
use these in informal conversations, but in writing they can give your text more variety and make
it read better: this book includes notes about formality wherever the collocations are especially
formal or informal.

6

English Collocations in Use Intermediate

